---
consolidation_pause: 3
date: 2021-12-14
---

# Introduction 
_I have chosen Option B for my final consolidation document and exit ticket submission._

## Fail (Methodology)
- The biggest fail that stood out to me in the third module was the alternative exercise I did in week 10. For the exercise we were asked to find a photo of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, load the image into an AI program made by google, and then use the tools to "digitize" and transcribe the hieroglyphs in our image. During this semester I was also taking HIST2706- History of Ancient and Pre Colonial Africa. One of the things I learned from that class was that during the genesis of archaeology (that is in racism, colonialism, war, and the control of systems as per the course outline) the history of ancient Egypt was white washed to conform to a religious narrative and [separate](https://www.mfa.org/exhibitions/nubia/vanessa-davies) its religious significance from black African people. In reality, there were other kingdoms of the Nile that were just as powerful, sophisticated, and culturally significant as ancient Egypt. One of these civilizations was Egypt's close neighbor, ancient Nubia. Knowing this, and aiming to empower/encourage the use of Kushite/Nubian materials in addition to Egyptian ones, I selected an Ancient Nubian temple for my exercise and got to work.

	Everything went well at first, until I got towards the end of the exercise. After I had used the software to shape and clean up a couple [hieroglyphs](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FHieroglyphs.jpg), I consulted the recording framework provided to classify my chosen hieroglyphs.... and this is where the fail occurred. The first hieroglyph I recognized as an Ankh, however it was not present anywhere in the recording framework. The second hieroglyph I did not recognize, and it also could not be found in the recording framework. 
	
	So from here, I asked myself why this was the case. Surely, a program designed to interpret Egyptian hieroglyphs using AI would have an Ankh in the recording framework? I felt frustrated at this point because after navigating everywhere within the program and consulting the [tutorial page](https://artsandculture.google.com/story/gwXxcXwClTM8JA) I could not find any information on how I could add new hieroglyphs to the recording framework, or even communicate with the creators about the issue. To me this had the potential to be a 'Glorious Failure' where I could use the absence of the hieroglyphs to improve the recording framework for others, as well as *inject* (See note) a bit of ancient Nubia into the historical discussion. In my opinion, that would have been a way to make the failure productive and "bring other up" (As per the podcast from week 1)

- Note: I am aware that the word *inject*  here implies I am imposing my own bias towards what information *I* think is important to consider/study in the wake of whitewashing Egyptian history. My counterpoint to this is that this reveals an issue with crowd sourced work. The data the project collects will be tainted by what their "crowd" feels is interesting to work with within the program. This can also be valuable as it avoids "professional archaeologists’ tactic of ignoring the esoteric underpinnings of popular understandings of archaeology”[(Lorna-Jane Richardson and Tony Pickering)](https://epoiesen.library.carleton.ca/2021/08/19/meaning-of-stonehenge/). 
## Win (Methodology, Collaboration)
- My biggest win from the past three weeks of work was when I reached out to the class on [discord ](https://discordapp.com/channels/739577555325157407/869970599613718529/912043933532586034) in response to the [barplot](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FCrosstab%20Barplot%201.jpg) I made in R for our week 9 work. This was a win for me for two reasons:
	- Firstly it showed me that I was thinking beyond the nuts and bolts work of generating the graph, and considering the meaning behind what I had created. I recognized a pattern in the data, however I was missing an understanding of how the x axis of the graph was defined. For an explanation I reached out to the class, which brings me to the next reason this was a win.
	- I accomplished the [goal](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FConsolidation%20Doc%202%20Goal) I had set for myself at the end of my 2nd consolidation document. By reaching out to the class, I learned that the "Groups" I had on the x-axis of my barplot graph represented the context/area in which a specific type of form was found. This lead to me asking deeper questions about why some areas/contexts may have had more forms than others. Does this say something about the contexts/areas themselves? Or could this be a manifestation of our methodology? Ultimately reaching out got me un-stuck, opened the door to deeper thinking, and fulfilled the collaborative learning outcome. 
## Challenges
- The most challenging part of the third module was the transcription exercise from week 10. Reading cursive is hard enough for me in ideal settings, and digital copies of old journals with weathered pages and grid lines makes it even more challenging. This was also a particularly challenging exercise because there was minimal avenues to seek help. I could reach out on discord to see if someone else could read the writing, but then what have I learned? How does one even go about learning to read obscure handwriting? Is that something that can even be learned systematically, or is it more of an art form? Additionally even if I was able to transcribe the individual page, how does this relate to the rest of the document it was a part of? This leads us to some implications...
## Implications? (Analytical ability)
- When Dr. Graham responded to my week 10 work and said "Transcribing old data is a moral imperative: excavation is destruction", I was not totally sure what this meant. I understand transcribing old data is a moral imperative, we want to preserve it as long as possible. I can empathize with this after my experiences in other courses, such history of ancient Rome, where historical records of antiquity were destroyed to intentionally re-write the narrative in favor of a particular person or ideology. The absence of historical data sometimes generates a meaningful silence we can use to infer contextual information... however I would arguable its preferable to have the data than to infer it.

	And this brings me to what Dr. Graham meant by this feedback. After reaching out to Dr. Graham on discord, he explained that the reason "excavation is destruction" is because when you dig something up, you lose the contextual relationships that something has with and within the soil. 
	
	My first thought after reading Dr. Grahams response was how this connected with an article I read on September 30th called [Archaeology’s Role in Finding Missing Indigenous Children in Canada](https://www.sapiens.org/archaeology/archaeology-residential-school-graves/). The article discusses the methodological and ethical challenges of conducting archaeological work to find the missing graves of indigenous children on the former grounds of residential schools. The part that specifically resonated to me in the context of "excavation is destruction" is the use of ground-penetrating radar (GPR) technology to find the graves. This is an explicit example of how contextual data from the soil can be used to locate graveshafts or areas the soil was disturbed. By using this contextual data, GPR enables indigenous communities to better care for the missing children in whatever way is best for that community. 
	
	So what does this all mean *digitally* ? When attempting to transcribe handwriting as was assigned in week 10, there is contextual information that is not necessarily accounted for. Is the writing un-characteristically sloppy? If so, was the writer rushing to get the information down? Another hypothetical situation that comes to mind might be correspondence from soldiers in war. The paper used by a soldier in the midst of war could be stained with mud, blood, sweat, or tears. The type of ink used could change. The handwriting could change even if the author does not, implying someone else may be writing on their behalf. All of these are examples of the kinds of contextual nuggets of information that can be destroyed when we transcribe the words from a page into a digital format. Sure, we can develop recording conventions to catch some of these pieces... but let me ask what is greater in an "affective" sense: Seeing a bloodstained fingerprint on the page, or reading "Stain/blood/top-left". One allows enchantment, and the other allows scientific analysis. Both are valuable in their own ways as we have learned, but neither provides a complete representation of the artifact. This is why the importance of Archaeological recording does not lie so much in the exact preservation of a given artifact, but in more so in preserving an understanding of how archaeologists interacted with the artifact [(Roosevelt et al., 2015)](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1179/2042458215Y.0000000004). This is where there is value in digitization, as using digital tools and thinking digitally allows for the creation of recording systems that capture the interaction between archaeologists and the things they record. 
## Previous Feedback (Professionalization)
- I have implemented feedback in earlier sections of this document, but In this section I will respond specifically to more of the feedback I received for week 10:

_"One of the things that you might’ve picked up on in this week was the idea that there are ways for archaeologists to be sharing their research with each other, and with an interested public. When we begin to share, we also have to think about the ways sharing can either reinforce the authority of the academic, or the way it can be used to build the community from whose culture, history, region, people the data ultimately belong. Think through what ‘sharing authority’ might really mean, both the potentials, and the dangers." - Dr. Graham_

- The potentials and dangers of sharing authority and information can have a significant impact on the communities they belong to, and for this reason it is important for archaeologists (digital and otherwise) to exercise care when sharing their research or authority. An example that comes to mind from the week 10 readings was one of the challenges faced by ODQ research in Qatar:

_"Finally, though presenting a unified heritage discourse is troublesome, multivocality is also  
fraught with difficulty. For example, when collecting oral histories, the origins of individuals or their families can be a sensitive topic: regional origin, sect, the length of time settled in Qatar, and population group or tribal affiliation are tied in with status and politics to a degree that make them uncomfortable topics in a modernized Qatar." [Source](https://hyp.is/RfdftF3gEeyeyo_Ha6vlDg/eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/109405/1/eBook_CHNT20_Morgan_etal_2015.pdf)_

- This demonstrates not only the importance of exercising care in the sharing of research, but also how archaeology is not only about the past but also the present. The origins of an individual or family in Qatar are directly tied with the lives they live today. To disrupt their understanding of their origins is to disrupt their identity, and their life. 

- Although the sharing of authority and information comes with great responsibility, it also comes with great potential. In the case of residential schools mentioned earlier, when authority information is shared responsibly and respectfully, archaeological practices have the ability to re-build and heal communities who were victims of significant trauma. The use of ground-penetrating radar to locate the graves of missing children, and enable the community to heal from their loss, is an example of the potential sharing information and authority has when used ethically. 


## Changes I'm making moving forward / Option B Exit Ticket section 

For this section, I will discuss some of my big takeaways from the course as a whole as well as how my work evolved in the course against the learning outcomes 

### Changes I'm making moving forward & takeaways
- The first big win/takeaway from this course was when I used the emotions I experienced while recording the graves to collapse the distance between the past and now. When I recorded the gravestone of a young girl, I felt a connection to her on many levels. My young cousin had just recently passed away from sarcoma, I had a 1 year old baby of my own at home, and the young girl had been born in the same hospital and the same year as my fiance. Processing the emotion that came along with recording this one gravestone made me realize that all the stones in that graveyard had made someone feel, in some way, like I felt then. Upon reflection, I realized that I did not feel so "Far away" from the other people in my graveyard as I thought I did. 
- Another big win for me was when I made the observation: “How the affective dimension of our work manifests is no doubt highly dependent on a variety of contextual factors such as personality, culture, methodology and more. I still wonder if there might be any observable trend between the types of emotions that enchantment engages with and the actions that result from said enchantment.” This win was significant to me as it showed me that I was capable of leveraging the knowledge I have gained from this course to ask meaningful questions that, if tested, could even contribute to our understanding of digital archaeology. As a student I have been trained (Or one might argue conditioned) to absorb, analyze, and present information. I had not considered that I may have the ability to contribute new information to the discipline if I chose to. This was an empowering, and important, insight for me.  

- The last win for me is learning to use obsidian for both academic *and* personal purposes. I do not intend to overshare here so I apologize if this point may be considered too personal for the course, however I believe that it is relevant. Since September, I have been using Obsidian not only for the nuts and bolts work in this class, but also as a journaling tool to complement my therapy. The system I use involves creating a daily note, and writing about whatever happened that day and how I felt about it. Any time I write down an emotion or key word, I turn it into a new "node" using square brackets. After a new file is generated for that emotion, I write down the definition of that emotion within that file. I found this to be a great exercise in not only recording the emotions I felt through the day, but also gaining a better understanding of what the exact definition of a specific emotion was. This exercise in mindfulness is beneficial on an emotional level, but it can also be used in an academic context. Instead of tagging emotions, I could tag key terms for a particular subject and then define them. 


	After I had logged a few entries, I used the graph view feature of obsidian to visualize how my entries were linked together. As you can see [here](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FPersonal%20Journal%20Mindmap%20Example.JPG) my entries are surrounded with clusters of emotions, and tied together by a select few. This visual representation helped me appreciate how many emotions I felt throughout an entry, as well as the patterns in my thinking and feeling. Although this is a personal example, I would argue the same techniques can be used to link my thinking about any particular topic.  

#### Option B Exit Ticket section 

-   Professionalization (eg, adapting/adopting to feedback)
	-   I believe I have done well at adapting and adopting feedback. I have consistently tied feedback into my consolidation documents (See [Consolidation 2 Feedback section](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FConsolidation%20Doc%20Feedback%20Section) ) and gone beyond the assigned materials by reading things shared on discord or suggested directly by Dr. Graham. (Ex. [meaning-of-stonehenge](https://epoiesen.library.carleton.ca/2021/08/19/meaning-of-stonehenge/))
-   Analytical ability (eg, addressing the ‘so what’)
	-   Discussing why we do the work we do and the implications of our work has been a central theme of the work I have produced. Perhaps the best example of this can be found in my week 3 [journal](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FJournal%20Week%203%20EXAMPLE) when I connected the recording of gravestone data with my own emotions. In that same journal I go on to explore the implications of who gets commemorated and how, and I tie those thoughts in with the reading by Katherine Cook assigned that week. 
-   Argumentation (eg, clear articulation, conventions of writing)
	-   Although my tone for this course has been informal, I believe I have articulated my ideas and arguments well. This was confirmed in my 2nd consolidation document feedback which stated:            "Your writing was great! Lots of course connections, and connections to annotations that could help define your own thoughts and work. Keep it up!! 1"
-   Methodology (eg, wins, fails, process)
	-   When it comes to methodology, I have always opted for quality over quantity. An example of this was in week 7 (The one where I wrote "WOAH THE TURTLES ARE MOVING") when I was having trouble understanding the pseudocode we were working with to make agent based models. In my [Log](obsidian://open?vault=obsidian-digiarch-lab-notebook-main&file=Consolidation%20Docs%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Doc%2FFinal%20Consolidation%20Materials%2FLog%20wk7%20EXAMPLE) I detailed how I encountered this problem, found a solution (Explaining it line by line to my Fiancee) and was able to move forward. What I may lack in volume of work, I have always aimed to make up for in quality through sound methodology. 
-   Collaboration (eg, how you draw on, or support, others)
	-   In the beginning of the course, I used hypothes.is to collaborate and annotate with my peers (Example [here](https://hyp.is/9HtFxDCPEeyXuS8rVyewhg/www.sapiens.org/archaeology/archaeology-diversity/)). I set a goal for myself to reach out on discord during the third module, and that can be seen [here](https://discordapp.com/channels/739577555325157407/869970599613718529/912043933532586034) 



On a final note, I would like to say thank you for an awesome semester. I really enjoyed learning about digital archaeology, and I believe this class provided me with an excellent foundation for how to think about not only archaeology, but about all new ideas. When I think back to when I started crafting digital history in the summer term, and where I am now, I realize I have gained so much from this course. The amount of deeper, meaningful reflection I have done between both courses is very valuable to me. With that said, I want to say thank you for the opportunity to learn from you. Hopefully we cross paths again in the future!

Cheers,

Tim